Marker interfaces in Java are a specific type of interface that do not declare any methods
 or constants. They are completely empty.


Why Marker Interfaces Are Used
The primary purpose of a marker interface is to "mark" or "tag" a class, indicating that 
it possesses a certain capability, property, or behavior that can be processed in a 
special way by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), a framework, or other parts of the 
application.

Think of it like a label or a flag that you attach to a class. The "marking" itself, 
simply by implementing the interface, provides the necessary metadata.

Key Reasons for Their Use:

Conveying Metadata/Capabilities to the JVM:

Some marker interfaces are recognized directly by the JVM to alter its runtime behavior 
for objects of classes that implement them.
Example: java.io.Serializable: When a class implements Serializable, the JVM knows that 
objects of this class can be converted into a byte stream (serialized) and later 
reconstructed (deserialized). If a class doesn't implement Serializable, trying to 
serialize its objects will result in a NotSerializableException. The interface itself 
doesn't define serialize() or deserialize() methods; the JVM provides that functionality 
based on the presence of the marker.

Example: java.lang.Cloneable: This interface indicates that an object can be safely 
cloned (duplicated) using the Object.clone() method. If a class doesn't implement 
Cloneable, calling clone() on its objects will throw a CloneNotSupportedException. 
Again, the interface doesn't define clone(); it's a signal.

Enabling Runtime Type Checking:

Marker interfaces allow you to perform instanceof checks at runtime to see if an object 
belongs to a certain "category" or possesses a specific trait, without needing to check 
for specific methods.
This allows polymorphic methods to behave differently based on the type of object.
Example: java.util.RandomAccess: This is an optional interface used by List 
implementations to indicate that they support fast (roughly constant time) random 
access to elements (e.g., ArrayList). If a method takes a List and wants to optimize 
its element access, it might check:
Java

if (myList instanceof RandomAccess) {
    // Use a for loop with get(index) for faster access
} else {
    // Use an iterator for better performance (e.g., for LinkedList)
}
This design informs the algorithm about the underlying data structure's performance 
characteristics.
Providing a Contract for Frameworks:

Frameworks often define their own marker interfaces to define contracts or extension 
points without forcing developers to implement specific methods. The mere presence of 
the interface signals something to the framework.
For example, a custom framework might have a Cacheable interface. Any object implementing 
Cacheable would then be automatically managed by the framework's caching mechanism.
Interview Specific Answer Summary:
"Marker interfaces are empty interfaces in Java (no methods or constants). Their sole 
purpose is to tag or mark a class, providing metadata about its capabilities or properties 
to the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) or to a framework.

The classic examples are:

java.io.Serializable: Marks a class whose objects can be serialized (converted to a byte 
stream) by the JVM. The JVM handles the actual serialization process based on this marker.
java.lang.Cloneable: Marks a class whose objects can be safely cloned using Object.clone().
 The CloneNotSupportedException is thrown if a class doesn't implement it.

java.util.RandomAccess: Used by List implementations (like ArrayList) to indicate that 
they provide fast, constant-time random access. Other code can check instanceof 
RandomAccess to optimize algorithms for List operations.

They are useful because they allow you to enforce a contract or classify types at 
compile-time or runtime without imposing method implementations, thus acting as a powerful 
form of type metadata